this past week australian story has
followed five different people
to capture the way that they're
responding to and even solving the
covid19 crisis
tonight you'll meet an innovative choir
master
a proactive intensive care specialist a
psychiatrist who has some tips about
managing anxiety
and a resilient school principal it's a
unique insight
into historic week
2020 will be the toughest year of our
lives
we're at war we're at war with the virus
the world has changed australia has
changed
and we're all in this together when
you're in the midst of a
pandemic you think this is the end of
the world
i saw through hiv that we do come out
the other end this is a public health
emergency we need to understand what's
happening in the other countries
the people that get the most control of
this are not the government not the
doctors
it's the people what can you do at home
to keep things
from getting out of hand on the one hand
i'm anxious and
you know looking at all these ways of
coping on the other
i really feel that we've reached a
moment in time
we can get through this we will get
through this
it's so easy to get trapped in your
misery scroll or to just leave the news
on and feel really bad about your day
positivity is is going to bring us
through this
it's been a day of extraordinary
developments the prime minister asked
people to cancel all
non-essential domestic travel there is
no two-week quick fix
there is no four-week shutdown and it
all goes away
well some hospitals are reportedly short
of protective gowns
gloves and masks and they could run out
by next week
[Music]
john fraser i'm an intensive care
professor and a researcher
[Music]
i am in charge of the critical care
research group
at the prince charles and the director
is an andrews intensive care in brisbane
the last bastion for the most
seriously ill is intensive care
and we're trying our best globally we're
trying our best but we
have never seen this disease process
before
the concerns around personal protection
equipment
are global we've got people in italy
phoning and writing tests do we have
enough
because the whole world suddenly needs a
massive amount
and no system is ready for that so it's
an unsafe working environment and i do
thank you i'll i'll see here yep so
bright and early 7 30
monday morning rocked up to a hardware
store the first time ever
have you seen how soft these hands are
i've never done hardware my entire
to see exactly what they had and whether
we could use
asbestos masks in an intensive care
environment
and met a lovely niece to this i've not
met before from the princess alexander
hospital
and she was there for exactly the same
reason so in terms of
systems we are the people that look
after
your breathing with the life support
machines the ventilators and then you go
up to a full
face our job will be putting these
breeding tubes in
as this virus is getting excluded in the
aerosol load there's a substantial
amount and that's where one of the big
risks are
in italy last night there was a note
came through 16 of the intensive care
specialists have died
well because they've run out of masks
i'm here today because i've been
watching what's been evolving around the
world
and i'm just worried that we will be in
the same situation
as italy even britain stories are coming
out about
doctors being ventilated even dying
so i think we we need to try and do
something and take
this time that we have to prepare you
will get better because they've run out
of
popularity so what would you if you're
going to go in and someone's got covered
then you're going to be
putting your stuff down what would you
buy full face positive pressure
i'll have several of them things
we all feel very uncertain it's an
uncertain time for the whole community i
mean
people are losing their jobs do you know
it's
it's really it's very
just very uncertain this is yours this
will be mine okay sure yep
so just normal i am concerned about
getting sick
it who wouldn't be yeah so as long as
it's all set up on your channel is that
a medium
large i've got five kids at home and i'm
concerned
i go to look after patients but in doing
so i give my children an additional risk
so it does concern me uh i can't do
anything about it and it is my
moral responsibility to go and look
after people that are sick
title 6913.83 okay
thank you
his question have i paid the credit card
we
sign up to do this job
and that's our role and for once in our
life
we can really make a difference and i
don't think that
i could get up in the morning and feel
good about
my job or my career if i if you couldn't
step forward at this point
when the community need the skills that
you've been trained with so
that's what most of us feel but sure
i'd love to go and hide out in a remote
property with my family and wait until
it's all over but i just don't think
that's an option
i it's it's just not
john
so i call my children together and a
couple of the girlfriends because
they're much more sensible
and talk to them about what might happen
not to be alarmist but see i might get
sick we're probably all going to get
infected
eventually but what happens if i'm going
to get infected first
which one of the alpha males is in
charge
i wanted them to understand and have a
rationale a plan
that's what we do in intensive care so
the plan would be to split the house
into
dirty and clean uh there's a lot of boys
in this house so most of it's dirty and
dirty
so what i did the other day was about a
kettle in the microwave for downstairs
do you want to stay downstairs with the
microwave because that's all you can
cook
so there's a fair amount of humor that's
number one typical of my children
but i think that humor is hiding a
little bit
of oh my goodness you know it's scary to
think that dad's gonna go and one day
it's gonna be like
gonna get a call going oh i've got
corona yeah it's not a nice thought
to think about your parents getting sick
but he is
at the age of 50. like he's kind of old
he's ancient
but like he is quite healthy he gets
there's a big enough number of us that
can look after each other but we're
gonna have to work out
who's gonna run the finances we talked
about the credit card we talked about
how the cooker worked uh we also talked
about power of attorney and wills
we didn't spend long in it i don't think
it will come to that but it could
what do you think i should do still
calling a hospital
i think the one i'm most concerned about
is thomas he's nine but he's not stupid
so each night when there's phone calls
between italy and usa
he's hearing about deaths so what was
the most worrying bit about
the virus thing for you i don't know
and then at nighttime you'll see dad
could i die
dad's what happens if you get sick dad
who's going to give you a pocket money i
think we'll be american joining us
at another meeting can you just give us
an update where you think we are in
terms of
how many intensive years we've got
around how many countries
the key is we don't know how to treat
this disease so we have to have
understanding what's happening across
the world
in uh you know even four days more than
a thousand patients
but if we can gather all the data we've
now got a team
from sydney and from uq of artificial
learning so if we get enough data and we
get it quickly enough
that machine learning can give us
decision support and it can give us
predictions and it can see
who gets intensive care who doesn't so
you've already had to
increase the bed capacity
i have never seen a study where 39
countries said
we'll join you here's our data and
that's because they're desperate to do
the right thing by the people
the best thing that we can do is to
join this project and i just say to the
population either people are going in
bondage people are having house parties
you know if we if we can survive in
three or four hours sleep a night surely
you can sit inside
we are declaring a state of emergency in
victoria
this week's shutdowns across the country
have all been done with one thing in
mind
to flatten the curve
[Music]
i'm david patterson i'm an infectious
disease physician at royal brisbane and
women's hospital
and i'm also director at the university
of queensland center for clinical
research
we know this novel coronavirus is like a
bullet train
hurtling towards us and we as doctors
as scientists we've got to act now we've
got to do something because this is
going to be catastrophic
and after it's been incubated
realistically it's probably
that we won't have a vaccine until 2021
and that's why it's important to get out
there
with trying to work out what are the
best treatments are there even
prevention strategies with some of these
drugs that have been
used for many many years we can incubate
it and have a look at it under the
microscope there's a group of doctors
all around australia who are specialists
infectious diseases
they were able to very quickly put
together a clinical trial
that would involve multiple doctors in
multiple hospitals all around australia
we're ready now to be at the front line
and get patients into this trial so that
we can find answers
tonight an epidemic they call the gay
plague
thousands of australians may die back in
1985 when i was a
medical student it was right in the
early days
of the hiv and aids epidemic
and every person i looked after ended up
dying
so that really is how i got into
infectious diseases
he was an emerging virus with so much
in parallel with covert 19.
there's no cure there's no vaccine
there is stigma there's a lot of
hysteria
the fact is over 50 000 men women and
children
now carry the aids virus now when i see
a patient
with hiv i tell them you're going to
live until you're 90.
let's hope we can get to that sort of
situation with covert 19. hong kong
residents are taking no chances
as the outbreak of severe acute
respiratory syndrome worsens
sars and mers were also novel
coronaviruses that did
cause big big problems the government
says there's no need to panic
after sars there was a fair bit of
rigorous experimentation that went by
looking at what off-the-shelf drugs
drugs that we might not necessarily have
used particularly much
for anything anymore
were they active against novel
coronaviruses
one of the drugs is the treatment of hiv
infection called calitra
and then the other drug is
hydroxychloroquine which we've had for
more than 60 years to treat malaria
and it was therefore of interest to see
whether these drugs would
block the immune explosion that happens
when people catch one of these viruses
in china they did some laboratory
experiments on people taking those drugs
versus people not taking those drugs
but it was never really conclusively
proven whether it worked or didn't work
because
sars disappeared and then we had the
mers outbreak
and again we didn't have the chance to
test because it came and went so quickly
we'll be doing a randomized trial where
we're going to compare an old hiv
drug an old malaria drug and the two of
them together
for this trial we want people who are
sick enough
that they need to come into hospital so
in other words
there's a chance they might not get
better by themselves
and we've got to rigorously assess
whether in fact what we're doing is
preventing people
from dying
like all drugs these can have serious
side effects
and that's how terrible mistakes get
made and we have real disasters happen
and therefore they should be studied and
have been shown in properly conducted
clinical trials to work
so this trial's been led from the darwin
institute in melbourne
along with others from around australia
and new zealand
that process normally takes 6 to 12
months and we're planning to do it
in a number of weeks one thing i really
want to emphasize is
how big a team effort this has been
we've got at the moment 60 hospitals
that want to participate
and the sooner we get all of them on
board with the trial the quicker we'll
get results
overseas now the us president donald
trump has called on regulators to
expedite potential therapies aimed at
treating covert 19.
it showed very encouraging early results
really encouraging i think it could be
a game changer and maybe not
unfortunately donald trump went on tv
and said that that hydroxyl horicon will
be a game changer in this
pandemic that was picked up by all major
media outlets and was disseminated
around the world within minutes to hours
it was very unhelpful him saying that
because as a result people have
stockpiled this medication to prevent
themselves getting infected
now the wholesaler is sold out
just like there was a run on toilet
paper we have seen a run
on this potentially effective therapy
but we don't know that it's effective
we know it's got potential side effects
people have even gone blind from the
drug or had
a serious heart arrhythmias
it's come to a point now where we're
having to say to people
just stop we don't have the evidence yet
it's a hunch
we're just about there it should be
within days now that we have our first
patient
into this trial and it's really going to
be an exciting time
but also a nerve-wracking time really
until the trial
is finished and we know whether we've
helped patients or not
we're all going to be on the edge of our
seats
[Music]
the rapid shutdown of many non-essential
services
has seen tens of thousands join the
ranks of the unemployed
they're like scenes from the great
depression long queues of australians
trying to access support
everyone's a little bit funny and on
edge everyone's anxious no one knows
what's going on
[Music]
i'm dr mark cross i'm a psychiatrist
with a special interest in anxiety ptsd
and anxiety in the workplace
i've got a specific interest in anxiety
because i also suffer from anxiety i've
done so since the age of four
and it runs in my family as well
[Applause]
this is an unprecedented time and it's
causing a lot of uncertainty
it's really hard i i don't think many of
us
are coping 100 with all of this
of course people are catastrophizing and
it's very hard not to
because i'm trying to not catastrophize
myself
i've got to practice what i preach right
i'm finding it hard
i worked at liverpool hospital for many
years in the department of psychiatry
there
and i was involved in the groundbreaking
tv series changing minds
look i'm psychiatrist i can cope with
crazy that's not a problem
and i don't call my patients that anyway
so don't worry about that
we have real difficulty in the medical
world accepting
mental health issues i was taught and
trained and it has
drummed into me that as a doctor you
know you have to be
stiff up lip you have to be perfect
i feel easier now talking about my
sexuality
which well wasn't very easy for many
years than actually saying that i've got
anxiety because that's accepting in a
way or acknowledging
that i have a mental health condition
okay yes and i'll send the prescriptions
through my facts and i'll see you
tomorrow okay bye cheers
i'm feeling the pinch and i'm trying to
cope as best i can
hey tim thanks for watching i'm okay how
are you
doing but my patients are really not
dealing with us
very well so from now on i'll be working
from home and i'll be
interviewing and reviewing my patients
by the phone or video link
[Music]
now with this social isolation doesn't
make it any easier
but however i completely understand
nip it in the butt as quick as possible
but no anxiety is through the roof at
the moment yeah
okay i understand why people are feeling
the stress and anxiety
hey i'll put my hand up and say i'm
feeling it massively
but like without community we're screwed
it doesn't matter how good or how bad it
goes
if we don't have community we've got
nothing
remember what we normally talk about
right talk about what you can do
for yourself and you've got to you've
got to do things for yourself and your
family
what's your business name again so the
company that we're starting at the
moment to help the veterans
worst business name ever it's the united
handshake
so as you can imagine that doesn't go
down too well at the moment
we've got to keep our sense of humor
australians have a great sense of humor
and that's keeping people going and it's
also a connection right
and you're using breathing so some of
the stuff that we talk about most times
using your breathing and you're
stretching in the morning i love my
stretches
and it just makes you feel a bit better
what i we always talk about
when you look at coping strategies
individual ones
yoga breathing stretching but also
i try mindfulness so mindfulness really
is
concentrating on being in the present
and focusing on what you're doing
and so people often say anxiety is
living in the future right you have fear
for the future
so you've got to really try and focus on
and ground yourself
in the present and i find that that's
quite useful
whilst we're all anxious and we don't
really know what's in store for us
we're smiling at each other maybe with
the slowing
pace i feel it can be a nicer time as
well
from last friday to now this week so
less than a week
we've seen a massive shift worldwide and
i think the world has changed
irrevocably we cannot go back to
business as usual
i don't think we ever can all my
conferences
meetings lunch dates have all been
cancelled
and i feel a little lighter and then i
think
does it take a virus to teach me how i
should live my life in a more balanced
way
children should go to school tomorrow
we'll be encouraging parents to keep
their children at home
should i listen to the principal here or
the premier or the
prime minister who what we're seeing is
absolute confusion
and against that backdrop what we'll
have is chaos in our schools
[Music]
i'm gareth leishman head master of
arndale anglican college
[Music]
i've been a headmaster for 13 years
i've never had a week like this not
in my 47 years of existence i have not
gone through this process
[Music]
[Applause]
before
good how are you as a leader
people look to you for guidance during
this time you've just got to remain calm
and in control
arndale anglican college is situated
about 55 kilometers
west of sydney the status of the school
this week
is we are open for the students
as i start each day i think there's a
consistent theme of my thoughts first of
all how many students am i going to have
at the college
yesterday we were down to about 140 150
students
so it'd be interesting to see today i'm
predicting that we'll actually go under
100 today
the students who are here who have been
here since monday as a large group of
to now be here today in a group of less
than a hundred
that must be totally disconcerting yeah
i think it's kind of confusing because
at the start of the week like i've been
coming to school the whole week
and it was it wasn't as stressful
because you were seeing other students
but as the days go by like we're down to
what 30 people
today and now the stress is kind of
coming in like am i meant to be coming
or am i meant to be staying home
where'd you go the second thing that
goes through my head is my staff
well-being
how many staff am i going to need to
chat to you today
i've learned that being present is
really important being there to listen
to kids being there to listen to staff
are they coping yeah we'll get around
and just make sure that everything
everyone's okay and support the best way
we can today
i've got teachers who are you know
gravely rightly concerned about their
own well-being and health
you know are they being exposed to
covert 19. my husband's still working
and that's what he says every day he
drives past central
and he's just just seeing the lines
working
the most challenging aspect for me this
week has been knowing people i know
lose their jobs currently i'm unemployed
so it's just
a bit heartbreaking um yeah
hopefully we get to the bottom of what's
going on
um so all australians can get back to
normality like you know it's just not
affecting us it's affecting the kids as
well
you know and that's the most important
thing it's the children that we need to
worry about for the future
i'm going to pop around about nine
quarter past just to see how many kids
you've got on site
thank you being caught in the centre of
a national
debate such as education in the current
climate has been very challenging i
think for any school leader
so there's no um notice came out last
night from the prime minister
no there's a press conference going on
right now
but there doesn't it appears to be about
just the icing self-isolation and stuff
like that
but the ama has come out this morning
calling for schools to be closed yet
we've got political pressures you know
you've got pressures from governments
who are trying to say on one hand
let's have social distancing but on
another hand can we make sure we're
staying open
and this is one of the things with
schools i mean we're lucky we've got a
lot of space
but for a lot of schools it's almost
impossible to keep that
social distancing it's just not
practically possible and i think that's
where some of the confusion lies for
educators
i think what i need is a clearer message
i think
educational leaders are being asked to
interpret and then communicate
and we're just hoping that our
interpretation is correct
[Laughter]
[Music]
in terms of anxiety and worry amongst
the students of this college
the obvious group is year 12 they are
doing their hsc
at first i thought it would be a lot
better to be at home and safer for
everyone especially my family
but i'm finding it pretty hard to
transition to online learning
so i decided to come to school today
hello people how are we
one of the real obstacles we face is
that for not all of our students
is home going to be the best place for
them to learn how's it all going anyway
out of interest
[Music]
is it actually working it's all right
like i find it a bit harder to
concentrate at home because like
you got siblings and animals and
everything
so my view is is that you might need to
actually start getting used to this
i think everybody's now dawning on this
is the way life is going to be for a few
months yet
[Music]
but what i'm finding is at recess and at
lunch
and in the after school when i'm
wandering around i'm seeing a lot of
happy faces of kids in class
so the kids who are here i think are
feeling very safe and secure
oh oh that's thank you so much
jimmy take that that's lovely that is
lovely
it was only you two today yep all right
you go back in
thank you so much bye bye staff are
actually able to cope
in this situation and they're actually
showing that and they're displaying that
and many of them are starting to thrive
in it
[Music]
in five ten years time when i look back
i would love to say
that we not only survived covert 19 but
we thrived
we actually became better for having
gone through the experience
life as we know it and the freedoms we
took for granted are fast becoming a
memory
border closures take effect in south
australia wa and the northern territory
today if you're flying back in
and you don't isolate for 14 days you'll
get a thousand dollar
on the spot wants people to stay inside
and work from home
[Music]
my name is astrid jorgensen i'm a
musician and a choir director
and probably best known for my work with
pub choir
we're going to call it couch choir i'm
going to post it
got to get it out it's up online
sunday night last week was the
culmination of the craziest week of my
entire life
going from the absolute high of maybe
our career peaking
in america and then the absolute low of
losing everything but then realizing
that no like
singing is still real and there must be
a way
to still connect with each other even
though we're at home alone
and um couch choir is the solution to
that
started in 2017. i really love
singing in choir and i have always been
confused why my friends don't join as
well
and it seemed like an obvious thing but
take choir out of like
maybe a church hall and put it in a pub
because you sing better when you're
relaxed
and then it's all just more beers from
there
so this is how it's gonna be i'll sing
at you and sing back what you think just
happened
and we'll go from there
i guess from where it started didn't
really imagine that it would get this
big we've been traveling around the
world
the fact that anyone can come along and
sing with paul kelly
or someone like that is pretty magical
[Applause]
pogba was in america and then
coronavirus pandemic was
coming into consciousness and it got
scary
we realized that our shows were
definitely not going ahead and that we
had to leave
america as soon as possible
[Music]
when we came home we made sure we all
got tested and that we all isolated
and when you are in isolation you do
feel isolated
like it's exactly what it reads on the
box
just had a brainstorm and realised that
singing still exists anyway
but we just can't do it near each other
and everyone's online at the moment just
scrolling and i realize those two
ingredients
together is the solution welcome to our
first attempted couch choir
we have sung through three different
harmonies we're close to you by the
carpenters so you record yourself
singing your part and when you're happy
with it you're gonna send it back to us
don't stress too much about what you
look like or what you feel like you
sound like or if you've made a mistake
we all make mistakes
i mean it's one way
that i guess we could bring everybody
together without physically being
together
i'm gonna sing through the whole part
from start to finish
and i'm gonna sing the guy's part
we had a thousand submissions over two
days
people from 18 countries so it was way
bigger than we thought it would be
she's nailing it
the magic was receiving the individual
submissions
because it was like very personal and
intimate
and at pub choir there's a thousand
people together and i don't know who
they are but
for the first time ever i met them
individually
it'd be super easy to uh sink into
misery because i've lost all my gigs for
the rest of the year
look at it but it's so nice
it's so nice these people sending in
their videos is just like
it's like unwrapping a little gift or
like a thousand
gifts i have a thousand gifts to unwrap
[Music]
paris owen my video editor tore her hair
out and didn't sleep for three nights
and edited them manually together
what a legend we're laughing so we don't
cry
yeah okay i think it's just loaded
this is my first look at the video i'm
so excited but also a bit nervous
[Music]
seeing all of those voices put together
in that way
felt just as good as a room full of
people
[Music]
so many people
is
it's so important to remind yourself
that you can still make
new beautiful experiences and this will
end and we'll all be there for each
other on the other side of it